---
layout: post
title: control
---
http://www.dd1us.de/sounds/DL3PD%20Alois%20-%2001%20-%20Sputnik%201%20first%20satellite%20reduced.mp3
https://spinoff.nasa.gov/Spinoff2008/tech_benefits.html
“Create vessels and sails adjusted to the heavenly ether, and there will be plenty of people unafraid of the empty wastes. In the meantime, we shall prepare, for the brave skytravellers, maps of the celestial bodies – I shall do it for the moon, you Galileo, for Jupiter” – JOHANNES KEPLER, LETTER TO GALILEO GALILEI, APRIL 1610

‘beep-beep’, a sound of wonder and disquietude reverberated across the Western Bloc, literally and figuratively; as even amateur radio operators tuned in to the transmissions on 20.005MHz.  The Pravda touted it as the ‘artificial moon’ as it climbed out the terrestrial gravity well, which had bound humanity to this Pale Blue Dot. Alan Shepard has just graduated from the Naval War College. John F. Kennedy was still a junior senator from Massachusetts with no noteworthy ambitions for spaceflight. Yuri A. Gagarin was an unremarkable Russian military pilot. While the ‘father of space travel’: Wernher von Braun was working on the Jupiter ballistic missiles. An unpretentious sphere managed to capture human imagination and paranoia: metastasizing in the global consciousness ushering in the Space Race. It was the 4th October 1957 and the Soviets have just launched the Sputnik.
The history of man has hung on a timeline of exploration
Political forces created the space programme. The Cold War competition between the United States and the Soviet Union is the reason why we had the tremendous acceleration in the space programme in the 1960s, and why we got humans to the moon before the end of that decade. But once that goal was achieved, that political rationale evaporated. Being buffeted by the winds of political change has become standard operating procedure for NASA.  Truly visionary goals will necessarily span multiple administrations.
Shaping a multiplanetary species. resides in a solar system that is dynamic and has a dozen or so ways to sterilize the surface of this planet. only thing that will remain of us is a couple deep space probes and a few centuries of radio waves that will slowly fade into the CMB. We possess thousands of nuclear warheads capable of occasioning an existential catastrophe, and we are at the liberty of a fairly fragile global ecosystem with limited resources. Beyond that, our being confined to this single planet means that a single asteroid collision or some other unforeseen cataclysmic event could wipe out our entire species and potentially all intelligent life on Earth. There are numerous other theorized existential risks
If genetic diversity and ecological variety are healthy for a biosphere, than problem diversity and solution variety are healthy for the infosphere that helps us address all sorts of modern hurdles and bottlenecks.
By building the large SLS rocket, Miller said, NASA is betting on large appropriations in future years that will enable it to undertake a massive, Apollo-like approach to landing on Mars. The problem, Miller said, is that NASA has not been able to command that kind of budget since the 1960s, when the space agency’s goals were aligned with the country’s national security aims to undermine the Soviet Union. However, this doesn't mean NASA has abdicated the lead in spaceflight. has nurtured this process, too. It has opened up its segment of the International Space Station for research and as a platform to launch cubesats. through its commercial cargo and crew programs, NASA has enabled private companies like SpaceX, Orbital ATK, Boeing, and Sierra Nevada to develop a new, modern fleet of spacecraft.
Commercialization of space In recent years, SpaceX has upended the rocket industry. Whereas established rocket companies like United Launch Alliance and Arianespace once scoffed at the California upstart, the success of SpaceX has them rapidly scrambling to cut their own launch costs and pursue reusable rockets. Analysts at the Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BofAML) expect the private space industry, which is valued at $350 billion right now, to octuple to nearly $2.7 trillion in the next 30 years.
When questioned what happened in 1492, many of us would say ‘ah I know Columbus set sail for America’. Not many of us would be spewing details about how England and France signed a peace treaty, neither would we be conversing about how Lorenzo de Medici the most powerful patron of the Renaissance had passed away, nor would we be speaking about the papal conclave in the Sistine Chapel. A robust space program of our time will be in my contention, a standing monument of our times which cannot be encapsulated in a cost/benefit analysis. A millennium from now, we are not going to be remembered for which faction came out on top in Iraq, or Syria, or whatever.   Our epoch will be remembered as the time when we first ventured off shores of the cosmic ocean and saw it from beyond the outermost planet as a pale blue dot, almost lost against the backdrop of the stars.
